In the 4th century BC, a curious Greek
man traveled the entire ancient
world. He wasn't a
warrior or a
king. He was something even rarer in the
ancient world, a
storyteller. He traveled for 8 years
visiting the world's most important
cities, experiencing countless
adventures along the way. His name was
Herodotus. And in this video, we're
going to be exploring the stories and
writings from his travels in ancient
Greece, the Persian Empire, ancient
Egypt, Babylon, Ethiopia, India, Arabia,
Cyia, and
Libya.
His travels began in ancient Egypt where
he writes about visiting the pyramids of
Giza and the translated conversations he
had with ancient Egyptian priests
describing the construction of the
magnificent ancient wonder. After his
travels, Herodotus composed all of his
writings into one extraordinary book,
The Histories, one of mankind's greatest
literary achievements not lost to
translation or time. presenting it to
the Athenian assembly. Its greatness was
immediately recognized for his efforts.
Herodotus was awarded 250 kg of gold.
But long before he'd be known as the
father of history, Herodotus was just a
curious young boy. Born in the Greek
city of Hocarnasses.
[Music]
Herododus was born in 484 BC to a
wealthy educated family at a time when
Helicarnaces was under Persian rule and
occupation. Now Heroditus could have
chosen a docile life. He was rich and
educated at a time when luck was in very
short supply. He was born at a time when
the Greco Persian war was at its fever
pitch. When he was just 5 years old, his
people defeated the Persians at the
battle of Platia in a decisive victory.
Herododus wanted to know why. Why was
there so much conflict between the
Greeks and non-Greek? Could he Herododus
trace these wars to their very
beginning? And could he do that from the
comfort of his hometown,
Hocarnasses? Of course not. So Herodus
stepped out away from Hocarnasses and
into the world. First to Susa, then to
Babylon.
[Music]
Why is there so much conflict between
the Greeks and
non-Greeks? When Herodotus journeyed to
Susa, the winter capital of the Akminid
Empire, he met Persians there and asked
them this question. In response, they
traced the conflict back to the
Phoenetians to a time before the Trojan
War. According to the Persians, the
Phoenetians came to Argos, a precursor
to ancient Greece, for trade. But in the
process, they kidnapped Io, the king's
daughter. They took Io and sailed to
Egypt. This, according to them, was the
original sin. So, at a later time, the
Greeks returned the favor by landing
entire on the Phoenician coast and
kidnapping Europa, the daughter of the
Phoenician
king. This was an act of retaliation.
Now you could say they were level, but
the Greeks would commit another act of
revenge when they manned a warship,
sailed to Kulkus, and kidnapped Media,
the daughter of the king of the
land. Kulkus was not Phoenician, but
they were non-Greek, and that was all
that mattered. So when the king of the
land sent a messenger to Greece
demanding both the return of his
daughter and reparations for the wrong
done to him and his people, the Greeks
basically told him to leave while
reminding him of the original crime the
Phoenicians had
committed. According to the Persians,
the tally stood 2:1 in favor of the
Greek. It was unfair, but it would take
another generation for the non-Greeks to
level the score line. Their revenge came
from Paris, son of Pum when he stole
Helen from Greece. The Greek were
furious and they asked for reparations
and Helen back. But Paris reminded them
of the incident with Media and asked
them if it would be fair to return Helen
when they refused the offer from a
generation before. After this, the Greek
raised a mighty army that sparked the
Trojan War, killed Priam, his son Paris,
and destroyed the city.
This, the Persians said, was the reason
why they regarded the Greeks as enemies.
This was the root cause of the war. Now,
if this were any other historian, the
story would end here. But Herododus set
himself apart from other historians of
his time and before by always asking
why. This is how Herodotus discovered
that the Phoenetians did not agree with
the Persians version of events. In fact,
the Phoenetians believe that the women
they supposedly kidnapped came
willingly. To them, the original sin
with Io wasn't a sin because she had
slept with their captain, gotten
pregnant, and aloped with them so the
whole affair wouldn't be discovered at
home. But even this account wasn't
enough for Heroditus. He wasn't
convinced. So, he proposed an alternate
theory set in a time more recent to his.
It was another explanation for the root
cause of the hostilities. According to
Herododus, Cusus, king of Lydia, was the
first non-Greek to encroach on Greek
freedom.
[Music]
Criesus was the last king of the Mnad
dynasty, the ruler of the ancient
kingdom of Lydia from 585 BC to 546
BC. At the peak of his reign, he was
considered by many to be the richest man
on earth. But before Herodotus told the
story of Criesus, he spoke of a
predecessor, a king named Cataloo, whose
reign preceded Criesus by generations,
and whose downfall was directly
connected to Cryus' eventual
downfall. Candaloo reigned over the
kingdom of Lydia more than 100 years
before Cus, and he was the last king of
the Heraclid dynasty. Candaloo had a
guard named the Jai whom he loved and
trusted so much that he discussed
everything with him, including deeply
sensitive matters. But the love of a
king is like fire. Enough of it will
keep you warm. Too much of it and you'll
find yourself consumed by its flames. Gi
found himself in front of those flames
when Candaloo insisted on proving to
Jai's how beautiful his wife, the queen,
was. And by proof, Candaloo's meant he
wanted Jai's to watch the queen naked.
This was an abomination by any stretch
of the imagination. And as Herodotus
pointed out in Lydia, in fact, more or
less throughout the non-Greek world, it
is a source of great shame even for a
man to be seen naked. So, it was no
surprise that Jai was against this. He
wanted none of it. In fact, he begged
the king not to make him do it. But
Candaloo was his king and kings get what
kings want. However, Candaloo assured
Jai that no harm would come to him for
seeing the queen's nudity. So at night
when the queen was undressing before her
king in their bedroom, Jai's watched
from a hidden spot. Unfortunately for
him, the queen
noticed. The very next morning, she
summoned Jai and gave him two options.
Either you can kill Candaloo and have me
and the Kingdom of Lydia for your own or
you must kill yourself right now. Either
the one whose idea this was or the one
who saw me naked when he had no right to
do so. Caught between the devil and the
deep sea, Jai, like he had before chose
the devil. He chose himself. He chose to
live. Jaigis killed Candaloo and had the
queen and kingdom of Lydia all to
himself ending the Heracid dynasty and
installing his Mnad
dynasty. But in these stories told to
Heroditus, actions have consequences.
And for Jigis, even though we could
argue it wasn't his fault for the
circumstances that made him king, the
Oracle of Deli declared that Candaloo
would have his revenge on the fourth
generation of Jais. Despite this ominous
prophecy, Jai began to conquer cities
and in his conquests, the Greek cities
of Militus, Smyrna and Kolifon came
under his rule. After Jaiges, his son
Artistis took over, continuing in the
conquests of his father. And like his
father, not achieving much. After Artis,
his son Sidiotes took the throne, ruling
shortly and even less noteworthy than
his father. It was Alates, son of Cadi,
that would build the foundation for the
baffling empire his son, Cryus, would
wreck on their end of the world.
Criesus, the man whom Herodotus pointed
to as the non-Greek responsible for the
first serious assault on the Greeks.
Immediately after he took the throne,
Herodus says Cusus attacked the
Ephesians. They were the first Greek
state to suffer his wrath. After the
Ephesians, Criesus attacked and subdued
all of the Ionian and Eolian cities one
by one, and he made them pay tribute to
him. After this, he built ships with a
plan to attack the Aian islands.
Fortunately for the Ionian Greeks living
on those islands, Cryus abandoned this
plan and focused instead on building
alliances with them.
The result of these conquests was a
wealth beyond the imagination of any man
living at that point in history. Sardis,
the capital of the Lydian Empire, became
the epicenter of that world, and it was
visited by every learned Greek who was
alive at the time. Everyone knew one
thing for a fact. Criesus, king of the
Lydian Empire, was the richest man in
the known world. Of this, there was no
question. But there was another question
that plagued Criesus' mind at the time.
It was not enough to be the richest. He
wanted to be the
[Music]
happiest. There are very few men wiser
than Solon. Amongst all the Greek men in
Lydia and amongst those that visited
Priest's court, none were as wise. Solon
was a native of Athens who was skilled
enough to draw up laws for the people of
his city and wise enough to include a
10-year clause that stopped the
Athenians from revising the laws he
made. The Athenians were notoriously
dependent on his services. And the true
reason for this clause was so he would
not be disturbed by them for a decade
while he
traveled. During his time in Sardis, he
visited one of Criesus' banquetss, and
the king asked him the question, "Who is
the happiest of all men?" Solon knew
Criesus expected to be flattered. Solon
knew the king expected him to utter his
name. So Solon told him what he really
felt. My lord, Telus of Athens. Criesus
was surprised, more curious than he was
pissed. So he asked Solon, "What makes
you think Telus is the happiest man?"
Solana responded by giving him two
reasons why Telus was happiest of all
men. In the first place, while living in
a prosperous state, Telus had sons who
were fine, upstanding men, and he lived
to see them all have children, all of
whom survived. In the second place, his
death came at a time when he had a good
income by our standards, and it was a
glorious death. You see, in a battle at
Alysis between Athens and her neighbors,
he stepped into the breach and made the
enemy turn tail and flee. He died, but
his death was splendid, and the
Athenians awarded him a public funeral
on the spot where he fell and greatly
honored him. Criesus was impressed by
this answer and accepted it. But he
missed the message Solon was trying to
pass across because his next question to
Salon was, "Who is the second happiest
person of all men?" Again, knowing that
Criesus was expecting to hear his name,
Salon replied instead with two names.
twin brothers from Argos named Cleovis
and
Bon. These Argive twins were blessed
with amazing physical strength and were
rich. One day during a festival of Hera
at Argos, their mother urgently needed
to be taken to the sanctuary on her
cart, but the oxen was missing. So, the
brothers strapped themselves to the yolk
and pulled the card with their mother
riding on it. The distance to the temple
was 4 mi. When they arrived, the people
of Argos praised the twins. And they
praised their mother even more for being
lucky to birth such noble men. Overcome
with joy, their mother prayed to her
goddess. She prayed that in return for
the great honor her children, Cleavis
and Bon had brought her, the goddess
should give them whatever was best for a
human being to have. That very night,
her sons died, and the archives built a
statue to their name. Criesus was far
from pleased with this answer. He was
certain that Salon was messing with him.
But Salon explained in plain terms that
no man alive could be called the
happiest man until he had died. Solon
acknowledged that Criesus was wealthy
and happy now. But he went on to explain
that unless good fortune attends him and
sees to it that when he dies, he dies
well and with all his advantages intact,
Cryus cannot be truly called the
happiest man. Criesus wasn't convinced.
He hated Salon. But Criesus didn't need
to be convinced. He would learn Salon's
lesson very
quickly. After Salon left, Criesus had a
dream. In that dream, he saw one of his
sons dying from a wound caused by an
iron spearhead. Now, Criesus had two
sons. One was deaf and dumb, and the
other, Odis, was one of the most
outstanding men of his generation, a
commander of his father's army and the
heir to his throne. Criesus had divined
for a cure from the Oracle of Deli about
his deaf mute son. But the response he
got from the oracle was, "Cryus of
Lydia, ruler of many. You are being very
foolish. You should not desire to hear
in your home the sound you have long
prayed for of your son speaking. It is
far better for you not to, for you will
hear it first on a day of misfortune."
Criesus didn't need an oracle to decide
which son to protect.
Criesus immediately found a wife for
Odis, withdrew him from the army, and
removed all javelins, spears, and
similar weapons of war away from his
son. Odis hated this, but Criesus
couldn't care less. While Cryus was
preparing for a son's marriage, a
strange man named Adrastice arrived in
Sardis. He wasn't Lydian, but Friian and
from a royal family. However, he had
blood on his hands, the blood of his
brother, whom he mistakenly killed in an
accident. In accordance with local
custom, he sought purification and Ccus
graciously purified him. Ccus also
invited him to dwell in his court as a
friend of the family, encouraging him to
let go of his past and accept a new life
as a Lydian. Adraus accepted. Shortly
after this, a boar began disturbing the
locals, destroying their crops. So, they
ran to Cryus, begging him to send his
son, Odis, and his finest men to kill
the boar. Criesus agreed to send his
finest men, but Odis was going nowhere.
It was at this point that Odis protested
against his father, demanding to know
why he was being treated like a child.
Criesus responded by telling him about
the dream. And after he was done, Otis
understood and responded saying that
there was no way a boar would kill him
with an iron spearhead because if the
apparition had told you that a tusk or
something like that was going to cause
my death, then of course you should have
taken these precautions. But in fact, it
was a spear. So since it's not men we're
going up against, please let me go.
Odysus' argument was convincing enough
to let Cus go. But he urged Adrastus the
Friian to follow him. Criesus instructed
Adrastus to be his son's bodyguard and
ensure no bandits ambushed him on the
road. He was to keep Odis safe at all
costs. Adrastus was reluctant, but he
ultimately agreed. Later on, when Odis
Adraus, and the elite young fighting men
found the boar, they began throwing
their spears at it. Then, Adrastus threw
his spear, missed it, and hit Criesus'
son. Odis died on the spot, fulfilling
the prophecy of Criesus' dream. Criesus
was devastated by the news, and more
devastated that he had taken his son's
killer into his home. Eventually, he
forgave Adraus because he recognized
that the man was just a tool of the
fates. Then, Cryus gave his son a quiet
burial. Meanwhile, Adrastus was wrecked
by grief and guilt. He couldn't bring
himself to approach Cus. So, that night
after the burial of Odis, he took his
own
life. Criesus' fortune had turned to
misfortune. For the next two years, the
Lydian king grieved the loss of his son.
Two years was enough because when word
got to Cus that a Persian king named
Cyrus had overthrown his grandfather
Oages, taking the throne to the Median
Empire, an empire that was stretched
from the east, the Parthnians, to the
Lydian frontiers in the west. Criesus
knew his kingdom was next. He knew that
he had to attack first. But before that,
he needed foresight.
He consulted the Oracle of Deli, asking
if he would succeed in a war against the
Persians. The Oracle's response was
ambiguous. If Cryus goes to war, he will
destroy a great empire. Criesus
concluded that the empire the oracle was
referring to was Cyrus's Persian Empire,
and he went ahead with the war. But the
Persian king defeated him on the plane
of Sardis, laid siege on the Lydian
capital, and captured him because he
wanted Cusus alive. This is what made
the Lydian king's capture interesting
because the soldier that would capture
him alive almost killed him first
because he didn't recognize him. It was
Criesus' death mute son that cried out
saying, "Don't kill Cus." Those were his
first words, fulfilling prophecy once
more. Much later, the Oracle would also
reveal that the main reason his empire
crumbled was because it was time.
Cantaloo's revenge had happened during
Cus's lifetime, just as it was
[Music]
predicted. Now in the hands of Cyrus,
Criesus' fate was sealed. The Persian
king ordered him to be burnt alive. They
tied Cus along with 14 Lydian boys to a
huge funeral p. Herodotus wasn't sure
why Cyrus went through this much
trouble. Could it be that he intended to
offer Cryus and the boys as a sacrifice
to his gods? Or was it because he wanted
to test the gods of Cus to see if they
would come to his rescue? Whatever it
was, in that moment, Criesus remembered
the wisdom of Salon the Athenian, the
man who told him that happiness could
not be determined until the individual
in question was dead and gone. Criesus
realized Salon was right. If he died on
this p, he wouldn't be the happiest man
on earth. Salon was right. Meanwhile,
Cyrus watched as Criesus mumbled Salon's
name to himself. And when he asked his
translators to find out what Criesus was
saying, the disgraced Lydian king
explained who Salon was and the story of
how they met. Already the fire was
blazing. The translators returned to
Cyrus and the Persian king found Cryus'
story profound. He had a change of
heart. Now he wanted the Lydian king to
live, but the fire raged. It was too
late.
In a fit of desperation, Cryus called on
Apollo. And according to an account told
of Herododus, Apollo answered with rain
that killed the fire and saved Cryus's
life. If Cyrus was impressed by Cusus'
words, now he was more impressed by his
faith. Now he wanted the former king by
his side as an adviser. It was a role
Cus gracefully accepted. And this was
how the reign of the first non-Greek to
attack the Greek people came to an end.
From here on, Herodotus would document
the exploits of the next non-Greek
aggressor, the Persian king Cyrus, and
the empire he built with bloody
conquest. Along with the Median Empire
and the Kingdom of Lydia, Cyrus
conquered most of West and Central Asia
to create the world's first global
superpower, the Akeminid Empire. As
Herodotus wrote down these stories of
blood and war, he studied the customs of
the people Cyrus conquered. He began
with the customs of the conquerors
themselves, the customs of the Persian
[Music]
people. The ancient Persians did not
build temples or statues to their gods
like the Greeks did. They believe those
who constructed statues, temples, and
altars to their gods were fools. They
worshiped their gods on the highest
mountain peaks. There they made
sacrifices to Zeus, Aphrodite, the sun,
the moon, the earth, fire, water, and
the winds. However, the Persians
celebrated birthdays like the Greeks
did. They felt like the Greeks did that
it was the most important day in a
person's year, and they celebrated
accordingly. Unlike the Greeks, the
Persians were not heavy eaters. In fact,
they made fun of the Greeks with this
saying, "Greeks remain hungry at the end
of every meal." Instead, the Persians
loved wine. They loved it so much that
when they made up laws and discussed
important matters, they would first
argue the matter sober. Then they would
argue the same matter drunk. And if they
came to the same conclusion in both
states of awareness, they accepted the
verdict. On issues of class and social
standing, you could tell whether two
Persians were on the same level by how
they greeted themselves. If they were on
the same level, they would kiss each
other on the lips. If one was slightly
lower than the other, they kiss each
other on the cheeks. And if one of them
was clearly inferior, he had to fall to
the ground and prostrate himself in
front of the higher class man. One more
detail that set the Persians apart from
the Greeks was how open they were to
adopting parts of other cultures they
traded with or conquered. As Herodotus
pointed out, they wear median clothes
because they considered them to be more
attractive than their own, and they wear
Egyptian breastplates for fighting. They
also placed a lot of importance on
bearing sons. Having sons was so
important that every year the king gave
a huge reward to the man with the most
sons. The Persians also had a pretty
forwardthinking justice system. No
Persian subject was allowed to execute
anyone who had been accused of only a
single crime, not even their house
slaves. In contrast, they had censorship
rules that were pretty strict. Anything
they were not allowed to do, they were
also forbidden to speak about. However,
the two most shameful things in Persian
culture were lies and debt. The Persians
believed that lies were worse than debt
because anyone who was in debt was more
prone to tell more lies. The customs get
more bizarre when you consider how they
don't allow their people to wash their
hands in rivers, urinate, or spit into
them because they worship it. And it
gets even more bizarre when you consider
that a Persian man or woman couldn't be
buried until it had been mauled by a
bird or a dog.
After Persia, Herodotus traveled to the
magnificent city of Babylon. There he
wrote about the Babylonian people whose
customs were further from the Greek than
the Persians were. Heroditus found that
the Babylonians buried their dead in
honey. The Babylonians had no
physicians. Because of this, sick
Babylonians would sit in the city
center, and anyone who had recovered
from their illness gave them advice. It
was a mandatory Babylonian custom.
Heroditus also found three tribes
amongst the Babylonians that ate nothing
but fish, and they were quite creative
with it. After catching the fish and
letting them dry in the sun, they would
toss them into salty water, then mish
them with tools and filter out the bits
through cloth. After that, they either
mixed them into a soft dough-like cake
or baked it like bread. The Babylonians
might have had unusual customs, but
their city was as unusual as it was
utterly magnificent. Heroditus described
Babylon as a majestic city that sat on a
vast square expanse with a circumference
of 60 mi. It was surrounded by a deep
moat and formidable walls. It was also
divided by the Euphrates River and had a
second inner wall where houses were 3 to
four stories high. The city also had
impenetrable brass gates. This was the
city Herodus says Cyrus wanted to
conquer. And to raise the stakes, the
Babylonians were expecting him. So they
locked up their gates, stocked up food
and supplies behind their walls,
awaiting the Persian king's siege. Their
plan was simple, to exhaust and outlast
him.
Meanwhile, Cyrus was still some distance
away on the other side of a river called
Gindes that stood between him and
Babylon. Cyrus was about to build boats
to cross the river when one of his
sacred white horses walked into its
waters. The river current seized the
horse, swept it away, and drowned in its
depths. Cyrus was furious. He responded
by laying a curse on the river, saying,
"In future, even women would cross it
easily without wetting their knees."
Then he postponed his advance on Babylon
and divided his army into parts. He
marked 180 trenches on each side of the
river Gindes and ordered his men to
dig, scattering the strength of Gindes
into 360 channels. This was how he
punished the river. This was how they
crossed
it. While Herodotus was in the city of
Babylon, he was told stories of
Babylon's most perverse custom. By our
modern standards, the Babylonian
marriage
market. This custom existed before Cyrus
the Great conquered the city. Heroditus
was told it was an auction for all the
young women in Babylon. Once a year, the
women who were old enough to get married
were taken to a certain place in the
city, and a crowd of Babylonian men
would form a circle around them there.
An auctioneer would get each of the
women to stand up one by one and he
would put her up for sale. He would
start with the prettiest girls. When
they had been sold off as wives to the
wealthiest Babylonian men for hefty
prices, he moved on to the next
attractive women until he had sold off
all the good-looking women. The least
attractive women ended up getting sold
for measly amounts to common men. And
the ugly or handicapped women often went
for heavily discounted prices. Heroditus
pointed out that the reasons why the
ugly women even got sold was because
auctioneers were able to set off their
loss with the excess profit they got
from selling the beautiful women. No one
was allowed to arrange his own
daughter's marriage to a man of his
choice. Everything had to be done at the
auction. Every man who bought a wife
also had to live with her. However, they
could be returned if they found
themselves incompatible.
We would think of this custom as
barbaric today. For Herododus, it was
their finest custom. After the Persians
conquered Babylon, the city faced both
societal and economic ruin, abandoning
this custom. As the years passed, this
custom quickly evolved into something
more perverse. Fast forward to Heroditus
time, and Babylonian commoners who
lacked an income pimped out their female
children for money.
[Music]
After Cyrus and his army punished the
Gindes and crossed it, they advanced on
the city of Babylon. At first, they met
and defeated the Babylonian army in
battle near Opus, located north of the
capital city of Babylon in modern-day
Iraq. Then, Cyrus and his army arrived
and laid siege on Babylon. It didn't
work, and the Babylonians were right.
The city was impenetrable. So
impenetrable that the Babylonians would
routinely mock Cyrus and his army from
the top of their mighty walls. This
continued for almost a year until
someone in the Persian ranks came to
Cyrus with a simple yet brilliant
solution. The Euphrates River ran
through the city under the walls through
one end and out the other. Cyrus got his
men to dig a channel that redirected the
lake into a marshy lake. And as the
water levels lowered, the Persians
entered Babylon through the riverbed.
The Babylonians had no idea what Cyrus
was planning before it was too late. The
vast size of their city contributed to
Cyrus's element of surprise. That day,
Babylon fell to the Persians. Now Cyrus
could call himself the king of kings,
king of the four corners of the world,
king of the Akimened Empire.
About 46 years before Herodotus was
born, Cyrus had conquered it all. He had
conquered both the ancient kingdoms of
Assyria and Babylon. His empire
stretched from modern Turkey all the way
to modern Afghanistan. His empire, the
accumitted Persian Empire, was the
world's largest. But it was not enough.
There was still more to be conquered. up
north in the vast Eurasian grasslands of
present-day Kazakhstan and Usbekistsan.
But these enemies he was about to deal
with were a different
breed. The Masageti were a large tribe,
the wandering type, but they were
terribly fierce on the battlefield. They
drank milk from their female horses and
their men had sex with any women they
wanted within their tribe. This was
their way. When a tribe member grew too
old to care for, his relatives got
together and sacrificially killed him
along with his livestock. Then they took
the flesh, combined it, cooked it, and
feasted. The Masageddetons did not farm.
They got their food from the abundant
cattle and fish along and in the Araxis
River. The only god they worshiped was
the son, and they offered him horses as
sacrifice. They did this because they
believe the only fitting sacrifice for
their god was the fastest creature on
earth. Herodotus noted that they
resembled the cythians in both their
clothing and lifestyle. Cythians was a
broad term used for Indo-urasians that
lived within that region. There was no
doubt that the Masagetans were a tribe
different from any of the tribes the
king of kings had brought under his
rule. They were a different breed and
yet these were the people that Cyrus was
eager to bring under his rule.
[Music]
At the time, the Masageti was ruled by a
widowed king named Tomeris. Cyrus sent a
message to her asking for her hand in
marriage. But Tomerus could see the
trickery for what it was. Cyrus wasn't
asking her to be his queen. He was
looking for an excuse to subjugate her
people without conflict. So she declined
his request. That was all the excuse
that Cyrus needed. He immediately began
his campaign against the Masageti, but
he first sought the council of his
adviserss. Criesus was still alive and
he was still Cyrus's most trusted
adviser. The former Lydian king advised
Cyrus to set a trap for the Masageti
army. They crossed into Masagedon's
territory and left a small force of
Persians as bait along with a banquet of
food and wine. The Masageti army led by
Tomerus's son Sparapaces met the
Persians in battle. They defeated the
Persians they found and began feasting
on their food and wine. Before the
Persians, the Masagetans had never taken
wine. They were not used to the effects
of alcohol. So, Sparapaces and the
Masagetan army quickly became drunk.
Criesus' plan worked. Cyrus and his main
army made quick work of the drunk
Masageti and captured Sparapaciz,
Tomerus's son. Cyrus planned to use him
as a bargaining chip to get Tomerus to
surrender. But when Tomerus heard what
had happened, she was enraged. In a fit
of maddening rage, she sent a strongly
worded letter to the King of Kings,
warning him, "You bloodthirsty man,
Cyrus, you use the fruit of the vine to
overcome my son rather than conquering
him by force in battle." Now I am giving
good advice. So listen carefully. Give
me back my son and then you can leave
this country without paying for the
brutality with which you treated a third
of the Masagetan army. But if you do
not, I swear by the son who is the lord
of the Masageti that for all your
insatiability, I will quench your thirst
for blood. Cyrus ignored this threat
when he received it. To make matters
worse, Sparapaciz took his own life
after tricking Cyrus into freeing him.
Without his bargaining chip and now in
enemy territory, Cyrus rallied his
armies against the Masagedans. Herododus
called the war that followed the
fiercest battle between non-Greeks that
had ever been. Unfortunately for Cyrus,
the Masagetons won. Most of the Persian
forces were wiped out.
Cyrus was killed and decapitated upon
Queen Tomerus's request. She had
promised Cyrus that she would quench his
thirst for blood in the letter she sent.
Though I live and conquer thee, thou
hast undone me, overcoming my son by
guile. But even as I threatened, so will
I do, and give thee thy fill of blood.
Queen Tomerus of the Masagetans held up
to that promise by dunking the King of
Kings severed head into a wine skin
filled with human
[Music]
blood. After the death of Cyrus, his son
Cambes II took the throne and became the
new king of kings. His first order of
business was to subjugate ancient Egypt.
Herodotus would have been somewhere
between 26 to 30 when he traveled to
Egypt to hear the accounts firsthand
from the priests of Memphis, the ancient
city's
capital. And as the priests relayed the
stories to him, Herodotus immersed
himself and took note of their culture,
which happened to share a lot of
similarities and yet was still very
different from the culture of the Greek.
The priest said that the Egyptians
originally believed they were the oldest
race on earth. But after Seemeticus, the
first pharaoh of the 26th dynasty,
investigated the claim, they accepted
second place after the
Friians. According to the Egyptian
priest Serotus spoke to, Semeticus
conducted an experiment where he ordered
two infants to be brought up in a remote
place by a shepherd who was forbidden to
speak in their presence. His logic was
that whatever word they spoke first
would determine which race was oldest
since there was no one around them to
imitate. After 2 years, the children
began to speak, and the word they
repeated most often was beckos, which
turned out to be the friian word for
bread. Since they had grown up in
isolation and no one had spoken to them,
Semeticus concluded that the Friians
were the oldest race, and all of Egypt
[Music]
agreed. The Egyptians were different
from the Greeks in a lot of different
things. Their culture was almost an
inversion of the Greeks in some aspect.
For example, while the Egyptian women
went out to the town square to retail
goods, the Egyptian men stayed at home
to do the weaving, a direct opposite of
Greek customs. Heroditus also noted that
Egyptian men carried loads on their
heads while women carried loads on their
shoulders. Women urinated standing up
while men did their business squatting.
Ancient Egyptians in general relieved
themselves indoors but ate outside on
the streets. And their reason for this
was things that are embarrassing but
unavoidable should be done in private
while things which are not embarrassing
should be done out in the open. They had
no female priestesses for any of their
gods or goddesses. All of their gods and
goddesses were served in this capacity
by men. Everywhere in the world, priests
had long hair, but in ancient Egypt,
they shave their heads. Meanwhile, in
times of mourning, most cultures would
have the grieving relatives cut their
hair. In Egypt, the relatives would both
let their hair and beards grow. The
Egyptians needed dough with their feet
and clay with their hands and picked up
feces with their hands, too. The
Egyptians also practiced
circumcision. Greeks moved their hands
from left to right while riding.
Egyptians moved theirs from right to
left. The ancient Egyptians were also as
religious as they were clean, cleaner
than the Greeks. Everyone scrubbed the
bronze cup they used for drinking
everyday, and their cloaks always had to
be freshly washed every day. As
Heroditus would note, the Egyptians
valued cleanliness above appearance.
Heroditus found a lot of similarities
between the gods of Egypt and his Greek
gods. While he noted that Egyptians
didn't all worship the same gods, both
Isis and Osiris were considered holy all
over Egypt, he drew parallels between
the Egyptian Osiris and the Greek
Dionis. Dionis was the Greek god of
wine. Heroditus found that the
celebration of Osiris in Egypt was very
similar to the festival of Dionis in
Greece. There was a lot of drinking and
wild parties. However, the priests in
ancient Egypt had to follow strict
cleanliness rituals that included
shaving their bodies every other day and
wearing specific garments made of linen
and papyrus shoes. Despite their strict
routines, priests enjoy benefits. They
were the responsibility of the Egyptian
people. They were provided free food,
including sacredly cooked meals of beef,
goose meat, and wine. However, they
weren't allowed to eat fish, and they
considered beans impure, so they avoided
it,
[Music]
too. Now, like many other civilizations
at the time, the Egyptians considered
pigs to be unclean. They avoided pigs so
much that anyone who brushed themselves
against a pig had to dip themselves in a
river to clean themselves with their
clothes on. It was so bad that if you
were unfortunate enough to be the
daughter or son of a swine herd, no one
that wasn't a swine herd would marry
you. The only time pigs were allowed was
during the worship of Osiris during the
full moon. This was the only time
Egyptians were allowed to touch, cut,
and eat pigs. only on that day and no
day before or after. Goats and cats, on
the other hand, were practically
worshiped by the Egyptians. Egyptians
did not sacrifice goats of either gender
because they counted Pan as one of the
eight primordial gods of the Egyptian
people. And Pan was portrayed with a
goat's head and a hegoat's legs. The
goat worship was so devout and so
intense that Herodotus mentioned seeing
a woman mate with a goat in public
during his time there. Cats and dogs
were also highly revered. If a cat died
a natural death in a family's house,
every member of that family would shave
their eyebrows. And if a dog died, they
would shave their whole bodies, head,
and all. If a house was burning, the
owner would save their cat first before
they bothered about their house. Cats
were also mummified and buried after
death in a sacred chamber. Dogs were
also mummified, but they were buried
beside their owner.
The Egyptians were obsessed with the
mummification process. Monguses, shrews,
hawks, bears, wolves, and crocodiles all
got mummified after death. There were
professional inbalmers who specialized
in this work. Herodotus described three
types of mummification processes. In the
first method, the imbalmer would extract
the brain by passing a hooked iron
instrument through the corpse's
nostrils, extracting part of the brain
and liquefying the rest. Then they would
cut open the side of the corpse, remove
all the intestines, and clean out the
cavity, rinsing it with palm wine and
crushed spices. After this, they filled
the corpse's belly with more perfume
spices before sewing it back up. The
next and final phase involved packing
the corpse in natron, a drying agent
that is still used to this day. The
corpse was left to mummify for 70 days.
After the 70 days was up, the whole of
the mummy's body would then be wrapped
in bandages made out of fine linen cloth
cut into sticky strips. The relatives
would collect the corpse, make a hollow
casket in the shape of a man, and
enclose the corpse inside it. Once the
corpse had been shut away inside the
casket, they stored it upright against
the wall of a burial chamber. The
process was the most expensive and the
best. Heroditus was deeply fascinated by
the Nile River. He noticed that the
Egyptians depended on the river to water
their crops while the Greeks depended on
it for rain from the gods. The Egyptians
found the Greek dependence on rain
silly, noting that the Greek would
starve the day the gods refused to give
them rain. Herododus agreed, but he also
pointed out that the Egyptians would
starve if the Nile dried up or didn't
flood its banks. It was from this
argument that Heroditus began to ask
questions. Why did the Nile flood? And
more importantly, where did the Nile
come from? What was its source? The
first question, why the Nile flooded,
had already been answered by some Greeks
before him, but Herodotus found the
answers to be nonsensical. One of such
answers claimed that the water of the
Nile came from the melting snow caps
from the mountains of Ethiopia that
flowed into the rivers, causing a flood
in the Nile. Today, we know that this
answer is at least half right. But
Herodotus felt it was wrong because he
could not conceive the idea that there
was snow in a region as hot as Africa.
Instead, he favored a more backward
engineered approach. He believed that
the north wind blew the sun through the
sky up to Egypt in winter. The sun
sucked up the waters that flooded over
the Egyptian fields and that is why the
water of the Nile was low in winter. So,
what about the source? A scribe of the
sacred treasury of Athena, the Egyptian
goddess Neath, told Herododus that there
was a border town in the south of
ancient Egypt called Elephantine. It was
an island on the Nile shaped like an
elephant's tusk. The waters around the
island were turbulent which made it
impossible to travel by boat along that
river. The scribe told Heroditus that
the waters of the Nile flowed up from a
bottomless pit hidden below the swirling
whirlpools at Elephantine. Allegedly,
the Egyptian king Seemeticus proved that
the pit was bottomless when he ordered
his servants to make a long rope and
lower it down into the pit. They
exhausted the rope and could not find
the bottom. Of course, the scribe was
wrong about this, but it was true that
Elephantine was the place where the Nile
entered Egypt. Today, the Elephantine
Island can be found in the middle of the
Nile River in the city of a Swan.
Ultimately, Herodotus would call Egypt a
gift of the Nile River. In this, he was
correct. Without the Nile, there
wouldn't have been an Egyptian
civilization. it would never have
existed because even to this day about
95% of Egypt's population live within 12
mi of the
[Music]
Nile. There was an interesting account
in Herododus' histories about a pharaoh
named Ramsinidus. According to the
priests who Herododus spoke to, Ramsidus
amassed a huge fortune and commissioned
a specially constructed impenetrable
chamber where he kept all his wealth.
Unknown to the pharaoh, the builder of
his chamber created a secret entry for
himself. After some time, the builder
fell ill and on his deathbed, he called
his two sons and informed them of the
secret entry into the king's chamber. He
encouraged them to rob the king, telling
them this way they would be rich after
he had passed. After their father died,
the brothers made their way to the
chamber, found the secret entrance, and
stole as much as they could from the
king's fortune. They stole enough that
the king noticed and wondered how it
happened, especially because there was
no sign of forced entry, and the seals
on the doors were intact. The two
brothers robbed again and again till the
king suspected that the thefts were
either an inside job or the result of
someone using a secret entrance. So
Ramsenidus ordered his men to set booby
traps within the chambers. It worked.
The next time the brothers came
visiting, one of them got caught in the
king's trap and could not free himself.
As Dawn crept closer, the brothers knew
they had to act quickly to avoid
capture. The trapped brother, realizing
the danger of being identified, asked
his free brother to cut off his head. It
wasn't an easy request, but the
reasoning was clear. Without his head,
he couldn't be recognized. So, he
decapitated his brother, leaving his
brother's headless corpse in the
chamber. It worked. The king found the
headless culprit, but couldn't identify
who he was. So, he ordered his guards to
hang the body on the city walls for all
to see. Anyone caught mourning the sight
would be seen as connected to the thief
and brought before the king for
questioning. The thief's mother
recognized her son's headless body and
pleaded with her surviving son to
retrieve it for a proper burial. She
threatened to expose his theft to the
king if he refused. The surviving son
came up with a plan to retrieve his
brother's body. He approached the
corpse's guard on a donkey carrying
several large skins of wine. When he
knew the guards could see him, he
deliberately spilled the wine to
distract the guards, who rushed to stop
the wine from wasting and began drinking
it themselves. Soon enough, they were so
drunk that they slept off. Once the
guards were completely drunk, the
surviving son cut down the body of his
headless sibling, loaded it onto the
donkey, and left. King Ramsidus was
outraged when he heard what happened, so
he came up with another plan to catch
this evasive thief. The king ordered his
daughter to work as a prostitute in a
well-known brothel and tasked her with
questioning every client about the theft
of the headless corpse. She was
instructed not to engage in intimate
acts until the client had answered two
specific questions. What is the
cleverest and the most wicked thing you
have done in your life? If anyone
revealed information about the theft of
the king's treasury or the theft of the
headless corpse, she should immediately
identify him and grab his arm. When the
actual thief found out about this plan,
he decided to prove he was more cunning
than the king one last time. So, he got
a human arm from an inbalmer and brought
it into the Bravo with him. When the
king's daughter asked him of the
cleverest and most wicked things he had
done, the thief told her that the worst
thing he had done was decapitate his own
brother when he was caught in a trap in
the king's treasure chamber, and that
the cleverest thing he had done was get
the guards drunk and cut his brother's
corpse down from the city wall. The
king's daughter heard him and tried to
grab his hand, but she grabbed the fake
hand and the thief escaped. When the
king heard, he was more impressed than
he was pissed. He sent men all around
the city to announce that the thief
would be fully pardoned if he would make
himself known. The thief chose to trust
Raminitus and visited the palace where
the king offered his daughter's hand in
marriage to him. Impressed by the
thief's intelligence, the king remarked,
"No one can surpass this man's
cleverness. We Egyptians are known for
our wit, but he outshines us all."
While Heronidus was speaking to the
priests at Memphis, he was told after
Raminitus came Kops. Kop's reign was
awful. The Egyptians called him Kufu.
Kops closed down all the sanctuaries,
stopped his subjects from performing
sacrifices and also forced them to work
for him. More specifically, he forced
them to build what would become the
biggest pyramid, the Pyramid of Giza.
Some of the Egyptian laborers were
forced to haul blocks of stone from the
quaries in the Arabian mountain range as
far as the Nile where they were
transported across the river and boats.
They worked in groups of 100,000 men for
3 months at a time. Heroditus says the
priest told him it took 10 years of hard
labor for the people to construct the
causeway along which they hauled the
blocks of stone. The actual pyramid
itself took 20 years to build. Each of
its sides were square, 800 ft long,
while the pyramid itself was 800 ft high
as well. It was made of polished blocks
of stone fitted together perfectly with
none of the blocks being less than 30 ft
long. The pyramid was built like a
flight of stairs. When that first stage
of the construction process was over,
they used tools made of short pieces of
wood to lift the remaining blocks of
stone up the sides. When the stone had
been raised up to that point, it was put
onto a different device which was
positioned on the first level. And from
there, it was hauled up to the second
level on another device. The topmost
parts of the pyramid were finished
first, then the ones just under it down
to the ground levels. The worker's daily
meal consisted of radishes, onions, and
garlic. And Herodus says he saw a notice
that read that the total cost was 1,600
talents of silver for the duration of
the pyramid's construction. The pyramid
of Giza was and still is a sight to
behold. But it didn't improve the
reputation of King Kops. The Egyptians
hated him so much that years after he
died, they refused to say his name, even
to Herododus.
[Music]
I have personally seen it and it defies
description. If someone put together all
the strongholds and public monuments of
the Greeks, it would be obvious that
less labor and money had been expended
on them than on this labyrinth. And I
say this despite the fact that the
temples in Ephesus and Samos are
remarkable
structures. This was how Herodotus
described the magnificent labyrinth of
Egypt built in Crocodilopoulos. The
labyrinth had rooms on two levels, an
underground level and a level that was
above ground level sitting on top of it.
And in total, there were 3,000 rooms in
all, with each level containing 1,500.
Herodus says that he went through the
ground level rooms himself and saw them.
However, the underground level was only
described to him. The Egyptians in
charge refused to show him the
underground rooms because it was the
tomb of the king who originally built
the labyrinth. Heroditus described
endless chambers, winding passages
through courtyards so complicated that
one turn would lead him to another
chamber and into yet another courtyard
different from the ones before. It was
complex, massive, and breathtaking. But
there was more. Heroda says that the
roof and walls of the entire structure
were made of stone. He also noted that
the walls had carvings of figures and
its culminated courtyards were made out
of blocks fitted with white stones.
There was a 240 ft pyramid at the end of
the labyrinth. It had huge figures
carved on its surface and its entrance
was built
underground. The lake of Morus was
another marvelous sight to behold.
Heroditus noted that it was more
marvelous than the labyrinth. He
described it as an artificial lake that
was 91 m deep and 413 mi wide, making it
as long as Egypt's coastline itself. The
ancient pharaohs had gone to great
lengths to turn it into a reservoir.
However, what was even more fascinating
were the two pyramids Herodotus claimed
were built in the middle of the lake.
They were huge structures that were 182
m tall, rising 91 m above the water. On
top of each of these pyramids, there was
a stone figure seated on a
throne. While Herodotus was in Egypt, he
was able to get an account of how the
Persians had conquered the entire
country, how Cambes II conquered Egypt.
Because after the wonders came the war
and Cambesizes, son of Cyrus the Great,
was now the king of kings. The pharaoh
at the time was II. And in the several
months that followed, he made two grave
errors that led to the capture of
Egypt. Ammesis made his first mistake
when he sent one of his eye doctors to
serve on the Persian king's request. The
doctor felt betrayed by his king and
decided to take
revenge. Second error was tricking the
Persian king. The Egyptian doctor had
urged Cameases to askus for his
daughter's hand in marriage. He knew
that Amicus would die before he gave his
daughter to a Persian. He also knew if
Ommesus refused the Persian king, they
would become enemies. So instead of
sending his daughter, Amicus sent the
daughter of the previous king.
Immediately she arrived at the court of
Cambes, she revealed the trickery to
him. Cambesizes was furious and decided
to conquer Egypt. Or at least that is
what Herodotus was told. One final piece
that led to the conquest of Egypt by
Cambesizes II had to do with a man named
Fannis, a native of
Hakarnasses. He was a councilman and the
most experienced tactical adviser in the
court of Ammesis. But over time, they
grew to hate each other. So, Fannies
defected. At the time, Cambes was
already preparing for the Egyptian
campaign, but he didn't know what route
to take. It was Fanny's who helped
Cambbases and showed him the way and
gave him the advice that led to the
conquest of
[Music]
Egypt. Cambesizes was
wise. Despite having full control over
the Neoablonian Empire and its sub
regions, including northern Arabia, he
still sent a message to the king of
Arabia requesting permission through the
desert road from Gaza to Palooium in
Egypt. Arabia and Egypt were bitter
rivals and the king of Arabia was more
than glad to help any cause that would
ruin Egypt. So when Cambes asked for
permission, the Arabian king granted it
and offered him help. But before the war
could begin, Omicus passed away
peacefully. His son Sonitis inherited
his father's throne and his father's war
with the king of kings. But without
Fanny's, the councilman and tactical
adviser who betrayed all of Egypt to the
Persians, Sonitis was doomed. However,
he remained in command of the Egyptian
army. Just before the war, they rounded
up the sons of fannies, slit their
throats on the battlefield and in full
view of the Persian force, drained the
blood in a bowl of wine, mixed it, and
drank it. This was their revenge against
Fannies for bringing a foreign army into
Egypt. The war that followed was
terrible, but the Persians fought until
the Egyptians fled from the battlefield.
Cambesizes wanted to take Egypt
peacefully. So he sent a Persian to
Memphis on a Midellinian ship to suggest
a truce. But the Egyptians smashed the
ship and slaughtered everyone on board,
tearing the crew apart limb from limb
and carrying the remains back inside
their walls. For this act of treachery,
Cambes not only conquered Memphis, he
killed 10 leading Egyptian men for every
man that was killed and dismembered.
Then Cambesizes killed Sonitis's son,
but spared his life. Much later, Sonitis
would take his own life after trying and
failing to start a rebellion against the
Persian king. But there was still
unfinished business. Despite the fact
that he had conquered all of Egypt,
Cambesizes was insensed that he could
not have his revenge on the dead king
who had insulted him with his trickery.
So he ordered his men to bring out the
mummified corpse of Omicus. He ordered
them to fogg it, whip it, pierce it with
spears, and pull out its hair. When they
were done, Cambes ordered for the corpse
to be burnt. Cremation was considered an
abomination in both Persian and Egyptian
culture. Because while the Persians
considered fire to be a god, the
Egyptians considered fire to be a living
creature. So by burning's corpse, Cambes
had violated both Persian and Egyptian
customs.
[Music]
After Egypt, Cambes set his sights on
Ethiopia. He sent spies disguised as
emissaries bearing gifts of a purple
cloak, gold, perfumes, and wine to the
king of
Ethiopia. But the king of Ethiopia saw
right through them and called them out
as spies. But he didn't punish them.
Instead, he showed his kingdom to them.
They found that the average Ethiopian
lived longer than the average Persian by
40 years. They were also better looking.
The spies were shown a lake where
Ethiopians bathed. It looked like olive
oil and gave off the scent of violets.
They also saw Egyptian slaves wearing
huge shackles made out of gold, bigger
than the gold they had offered the king.
The only thing the Ethiopian king
admitted the Persians did better than
them was wine. When he was done showing
the treacherous tourists his kingdom, he
unrung a bow. Then he gave them the bow
as a gift to canvases along with a
warning. Here is a word of advice from
the king of the Ethiopians. When the
Persians can draw bows of this size as
easily as I do now, then he can march
against the longived Ethiopians with an
army that considerably outnumbers yours.
In the meantime, he should be grateful
to the gods for not making the sons of
Ethiopia think of acquiring additional
lands besides their own. When Cambes
received the gift and the warning, he
was incensed. Immediately, he set out on
an expedition to conquer Ethiopia. But
it was doomed from the start because, as
Herodotus pointed out, Ethiopia was on
the ends of the earth. It was far enough
that by the time they reached a fifth of
the journey, his army ran out of food.
Then they ran out of yolk animals
because the men had eaten it all. Cambes
insisted on continuing because according
to him, there was still grass and plants
to survive on. By the time they got to
the desert, his men had resorted to
cannibalism. And soon they began casting
lots to choose 10 men among them for
food. This was what made Cambbases give
up on his Ethiopian campaign and return
to
Egypt. There was a tragic
misunderstanding between Cambes and the
Egyptians. When he returned to Egypt
after the failed conquest of Ethiopia,
the Egyptians were feasting and dancing,
celebrating the festival of Apis, bull
god of fertility and the underworld.
Cambesizes was convinced they were
mocking him. So he summoned the
governors of Memphis and asked them why
the Egyptians were celebrating. The
governors told Cambes about the festival
of Apis. Cambes accused them of lying
and ordered their execution. Then he
summoned the priests of Apis. They gave
him the same response the governors had.
But Campbases wasn't convinced. So he
summoned Apis himself to appear before
him. Now, Apis was a literal calf born
from a cow chosen by a beam of light
that descended on it from the sky.
Cambes stabbed Apis in the thigh and
mocked both the priests and the Egyptian
people, saying, "You poor fools. Is this
what gods are like? Are they creatures
of flesh and blood capable of being
wounded by weapons? Well, this is the
god you Egyptians deserve, but you won't
get away with making me a
laughingstock."
Cambesizes ordered the priest to be
flogged. He outlawed the worship of Apis
and ordered anyone who worshiped the god
to be killed. Meanwhile, Apis would die
from the thigh wound inflicted by
Cambes. Cambesizes wasn't just
frustrated. He had gone crazy and his
insanity grew with each day because his
next target was his brother Smearis whom
he suddenly suspected of treason.
Smearis was the only one who had managed
to draw the bow the Ethiopian sent. This
caused Cambesizes to be jealous. So
Cambes sent him to
Persia. Then after he had a dream where
Smearis was sitting on his throne with
his head in the clouds, Cambes sent
Prexipes, the Persian he trusted the
most, to kill him. After killing his
brother, Cambes forcefully married his
younger sister. Then he fell in love
with another of his sisters, killed the
one he married, and took this other
sister as a new wife. But the insanity
had just
begun. His Persian subjects had begun to
gossip about his insanity and question
his reign. So to prove how sane he was
to Prexipes and the Persian people,
Campbasy shot an arrow into the heart of
Prexipe's son from his throne. His logic
was if he was truly insane, he wouldn't
have made the
[Music]
shot. As Cambes turned into a mad king
in Egypt, two Maji brothers, Pises and
Smearis, rebelled against him in Persia.
No one knew Cambes had killed his
brother. The Persian people didn't even
know the Persian prince Smearis was
dead. Only Cambes and Prexipes were
aware. Somehow the Maji brothers had
found out when they noticed his absence.
So they hatched a plan. One of the Maji
brothers, Smearis, resembled and shared
his name with the deceased prince.
Potty's atheis plotted to usurp the
kingdom by tricking the Persian people
into thinking his brother Smearis was
Camby's younger brother. So messengers
were sent to spread the message that the
new ruler of Persia was Smearis, not
Cambes. When Cambes heard this message,
he thought Prexipes had betrayed him by
sparing Smearis. But Prexip defended
himself and insisted that he carried out
the mission as ordered. Prexipes went to
Persia to investigate the matter
himself. There he discovered the
treachery of the Maji brothers and sent
word back to Cambes. It was at that
moment that Cambes remembered the dream
he had. Smearis sitting on his throne
with his head in the clouds. It wasn't
his brother the dream was warning him
about. It was the Maji. Cambesizes
realized he shouldn't have killed his
brother and this affected him deeply. So
he decided to confront the Maji himself.
In a tragic turn of events while
attempting to ride to Susa to face the
Maji brothers, Gambas hurt himself in
the thigh with his sword in the same
spot he had previously wounded the
Egyptian god Apis. It was a fatal wound
and he was sure he would die. So before
his death, Cambases confessed to the
important Persians present, expressing
regret for killing his own brother and
warning them of the Majian threat. He
urged them to reclaim power, encouraging
them to use any means possible to regain
control. But they didn't believe him
because they thought it was the crazed
rambling of a dying king. 20 days after
the accident, Cambesizes died childless
with no heir to his throne.
[Music]
After the death of Cambes, the Persians
mourned their king's passing, but the
Magus brothers had successfully tricked
them into thinking the fake smearis was
the real brother of Cambes, son of
Cyrus. This fake smearis continued to
rule for 7 months and was very generous
towards the Persian people. So they
loved him. But the elites and ruling
class of Persia were suspicious.
specifically a nobleman named Otanis
whose daughter named Fedameia had
married Cambes and was now married to
the fake smearis the Maji as a result of
his ascent to the throne. So he sent a
message to his daughter instructing her
to feel for Smearis' ears while he was
asleep to determine if he was the true
son of Cyrus or an impostor. When Cyrus
was alive, he chopped off the ear of the
fake Smearis for a crime he committed.
Later that night, Fedameia confirmed
Otani's fears. The smearis on the throne
was in fact the Maji brother. Otanis
revealed this discovery to other noble
Persians, including Darius, the son of
Histapes, who was the second cousin of
Cyrus the Great. Together, these nobles
decided to overthrow the Magus. Darius
was eager to act quickly, so he
convinced the others to strike
immediately because he was certain they
would be betrayed if they waited. While
this was happening, the Maji brothers
worked hard to win Prexipes to their
side because they believed he was the
only one who knew the truth about
Smearis' death. They promised him land
and wealth. In return, Prexipes would
announce to the Persian people that the
fake Smearis was the legitimate king of
kings. However, Prexipes used the
opportunity to confess and reveal the
Maji's deception to all of Persia. He
explained to them how he helped Cambes
kill smearis. Then he exposed the magus
on the throne as an
impostor. When he was done, Prexipes
took his life by throwing himself off a
tower. The six noblemen along with
Darius killed the Magus brothers and
they crowned Darius as the new king of
the Amined
[Music]
Empire. When Darius became king, he
divided the kingdom into 20 districts.
The Indian district specifically brought
a tribute of gold dust to the Persian
king and Herododus wrote about them. The
Indians resided in the far eastern part
of Asia and lived in diverse tribes with
varying languages and lifestyles. Some
of them were nomadic while others lived
in river marshes wearing clothes made of
plants. The Pota tribe east of the Marsh
Indians had a custom of eating raw meat.
They were also quite cannibalistic. If a
member in their group, man or woman, got
sick, their closest friends would kill
them. They believe that if the sick
person got worse, their flesh would
spoil. Even if the sick person denied
being ill, their friends would ignore
their protests, kill them, and then have
a feast. The same rule applied to women
who fell sick. Her closest female
friends would follow the same procedure.
They also sacrificed and ate anyone who
got old. However, an old tribe member
was rare because most of them were
actually killed before they got old.
Surprisingly, there was another Indian
tribe that refrained from killing. They
also don't grow crops or build houses.
Instead, they relied on naturally
growing vegetable seed for sustenance.
And if any of their tribe members fell
ill, they went to a remote location to
rest. No tribe member would check on
them, even if they died on that spot.
Now concerning the gold that the Indians
had, it belonged to the Indians near the
Kasperus and Pocktakon territory north
of the rest of the Indians. They had a
reputation for their warlike nature and
for their expeditions in search of gold
in a sandy desert. In this same desert,
Herodotus described massive ants the
size of foxes that dug up sand filled
with gold. There is no evidence that
ants of this size existed even before
Herodotus's time. Today, many experts
believe he might have been referring to
Himalayan marmets. Whatever it was, this
is where the Indians got their gold
from. They use teams of three camels
timing their expeditions to coincide
with the hottest part of the day when
the fox-sized ants retreat underground.
When the Indians reached their
destination, they filled their bags with
sand and promptly headed back home.
According to the Persian belief, the
ants have an acute sense of smell and
they also happen to be the fastest
creatures on Earth. Once they detect the
Indians, they pursue them. During this
chase, the Indians will sometimes leave
the slower male camels to distract the
pursuing
[Music]
ants. While the Indians brought gold to
Darius, the Arabians offered spices.
Heronidus described Arabia as the
farthest south inhabited place on Earth.
It is also the only place that produces
frankincense, mirror, cassia, cinnamon,
and rock rose resin. All of these spices
except myrrh were difficult to get, but
the Arabians had their ways. The
Arabians got frankincense from a
specific tree that was guarded by lots
of small spotted winged snakes. To get
the spice from the tree, the Arabians
had to burn thorax resin to ward off the
snakes. Cassia could be found in a
shallow lake surrounded by winged
creatures resembling bats, which were
hostile and made a frightful noise when
spooked. Arabians got past the bat-like
creatures by wrapping their entire
bodies and faces except for their eyes
in oxhide and other leathers. However,
they had to also protect their eyes. The
origin of cinnamon is uncertain, but
some believe it grew where Dionosis was
raised. Arabians claimed that large
birds carried cinnamon sticks to their
nests built on inaccessible cliffs. To
obtain cinnamon, Arabians placed large
pieces of dead yolk animals near the
nests. The birds, unable to lift the
heavy pieces, caused the nest to
collapse, allowing Arabians to collect
cinnamon from the ground. The final
spice, rock resin, was found in the
beard of hegoats. Although the location
where it was found may have had an
unpleasant odor, the resin itself was
highly fragrant and used in various
perfumes. During Herodotus' time, it was
the most common incense burned by the
[Music]
Arabians. A little after Darius became
king of Persia, and a little less after
he divided his vast kingdom into
districts, he faced his first real test.
It involved a nobleman who was one of
the six rebels that killed the Magus
brothers and made him king. His name was
Infraranes. One of the privileges the
six enjoyed was the ability to see the
king without permission except when he
was having sex. One day when
Interphranes came visiting, he had a
bloody altercation and mutilated the
king's guard because they stopped him
from seeing Darius. They told him the
king was having sex. He did not believe
them at that time, but he would later
learn they were telling the truth. When
Darius heard into Frany's entitlement,
he began to fear the rebels were
conspiring against him, so he
meticulously interrogated each of the
six rebels until he was sure of the
innocence of the remaining five.
Interranis had acted alone. Darius
imprisoned Interfranis, his sons, and
all of his male relatives. Interfranis's
wife begged for mercy from the king.
Darius heard her and gave her a choice
to save one family member. Interfanes
wife thought about it and chose her
brother. Darius was confused. Why didn't
you choose your husband or one of your
sons? The woman responded that she could
always remarry and she could always have
another son. But her parents were dead,
so she had no way of getting another
brother. Impressed by this, Darius
spared her brother and oldest son.
However, the others including her
husband and defraines were
[Music]
executed. A year later, Darius faced his
second test on the battlefield when the
Babylonians staged a wellplanned revolt.
They began planning the revolt at least
a year before when they heard the Maji
brothers had taken the throne. They
silently prepared for a siege through
the Magus' rule and the insurrection
that brought Darius to the throne. In
what was perhaps their most desperate
move, the Babylonians gathered all the
women in the city except mothers and one
single woman for each family. They
strangled these women to conserve
supplies for the siege they knew would
come. And it
did. Because when Darius heard of their
rebellion, he gathered his Persian army
and made his way to Babylon. He besieged
Babylon for a year and a half, trying
every trick in the book and borrowing
some of Cyrus's methods, but nothing
proved
effective. Meanwhile, the inhabitants of
the city mocked him and taunted him from
the city walls. In fact, one Babylonian
stood on the city walls and mocked the
Persians, saying, "What are you doing
sitting there, men of Persia? Why don't
you just go away? Babylon will fall into
your hands only when mules start bearing
young. The Babylonian assumed this would
never happen because mules were known to
be
[Music]
infertile. However, in the 20th month of
the siege, a mule that belonged to
Zopirus gave birth. Zopirus was the son
of Megabis, one of the six noblemen that
rebelled against the Magus brothers and
brought Darius to the Persian throne.
Convinced that this rare event signaled
Babylon's fall, Zopirus hatched a plan.
He mutilated himself, cutting his nose
and ears and approached Darius. Darius
was shocked and initially condemned the
act until Zopirus explained his plan.
Zopirus would approach the city wall of
Babylon alone. He would tell the
Babylonian that Darius was the one who
mutilated his face, gain their trust,
and convince them to give him command of
the Babylonian army. After this first
phase, all Darius had to do was deploy a
few thousand troops to specific places
for Zopirus to destroy. This would make
the Babylonians trust Zopirus
completely. When they were comfortable
enough that Zopirus was on their side,
he would open the gates of Babylon from
the inside, letting the Persian troops
in, and recapturing Babylon for the
glory of Darius. The plan worked
perfectly, like a finely tuned wheel.
Zopirus tricked the Babylonians, opened
their gates for the Persian forces, and
Babylon fell. Darius destroyed the walls
of Babylon, executed 3,000 of their most
prominent men, impaling them as a
warning to others. However, he allowed
the remaining Babylonians to continue
living there. To replenish the
population, Darius ordered people from
nearby settlements to send women to
Babylon. This resulted in 50,000 women
moving into the city. Darius celebrated
Zopirus as a Persian hero, made him
governor of Babylon, exempted him from
taxes for the rest of his life, and
lavished gifts on him. It is said that
Darius often expressed the opinion that
he would prefer to see Zopuris without
his injuries than gain 20 more
Babylons. After conquering Babylon,
Darius set his sights on Cythia, a nomad
wandering tribe that believed they were
the youngest people in the world because
they descended from the offsprings of
Heracles. Darius hated the Cytheians
because they invaded the Medians, his
ancestors, and conquered those who
opposed them in battle. They had also
enslaved its people twice. And they had
a habit of blinding all of their
slaves. The first time they enslaved the
Midi, they chased down the Crearanss and
were away from their homeland for 28
years. While they were away, the wives
of the Cyians laid with their slaves and
had children. The second time the
Cythians enslaved the Medians was upon
their return after 28 years of absence.
They met resistance from the slaves and
their children. When the returning
Cythians tried and failed to reclaim
their home, they came up with an
alternative. A Cythian proposed using
horsehips instead of weapons against the
slaves. He felt the slaves were only
bold because the Cythians were treating
them as equals by fighting them with
weapons. For some reason, this strategy
worked. The slaves and their sons were
confused and terrified by the horse
whips. So they scattered and the
cythians regained control over Asia.
Sometime around 441 BC, Herodotus
traveled to Cythia himself and wrote
extensively about them, about their
geography, their customs and
practices. Heroditus found similarities
between the gods the Cyians and the
Greeks worshiped. He felt they were
mostly the same just under different
names. Hestia was their most important
deity followed by Zeus and Earth whom
they consider to be Zeus's wife.
However, unlike the Greek, they didn't
create statues, altars, or temples for
their gods except
Aries. Also, the Cyians did not use
fires or libations when conducting
sacrifices for their gods. The most
common creatures used for sacrifice were
horses. They were killed and cooked for
meat by the Cythians. Since there were
very few trees in Cyia, the Cythians
used the bones of sacrificial meat to
cook. After cooking and before feasting
on the meal, the worshippers would offer
some of the meat and inards as first
fruits to the gods by throwing them
forward. In each province, there was a
sanctuary constructed for Aries
consisting of a large pile of sticks
with a square platform on top. Every
year, the Cyians added sticks to the
platform. When it was time for the
festival, they placed an iron dagger on
the platform that symbolized Aries. More
domestic animals and horses were offered
to the dagger than to any other god.
They also offered prisoners of war to
the dagger, but the prisoners were
sacrificed differently. The cythians
slashed the selected prisoners throats
and their blood was poured over the
dagger. Meanwhile, the right arms of all
slaughtered enemies were severed and
thrown into the air. Bamed bodies were
also sacrificed. In Cythian war customs,
when a Cythian kills his first man, he
must drink the victim's blood. After
that, the Cythians must present the king
with heads of those they kill because
without it, they won't have a share in
the spoils of war. The Cyians must also
skin their victim's heads. And this
process involves making a circular cut
on the scalp, shaking the scalp off,
scraping the skull with a cow's rib, and
meeting the skin into a rag that they
attached to their horses bridal. The
more skin rags a Cythian possesses, the
braver they're considered by their
peers. Now, the Cythians weren't the
type to let a good thing go to waste.
They use their enemies skulls as cups.
And if a Cyian had a falling out with
one of his relatives, they fought to the
death in the presence of their king. The
winner treated the loser's skull the
same way he treated his enemies. And
when he had important visitors, the
Cythian would show them the skull and
share the story of how it once belonged
to their relative. This was how the
Cythians defined
[Music]
courage. The burial of the Cyian king
was a bloody affair. First, a huge
square pit was dug. Then the king's body
was covered in wax and filled with
spices, herbs, and sewn back up. The
Cythians in the royal house grieved by
cutting their ears, shaving their heads,
slashing their arms and foreheads,
mutilating their noses, and piercing
their left hands with arrows. As they
moved the king's body on a wagon across
different tribes, every member of each
tribe was expected to show their grief
in the same manner as the royal
cytheians. Eventually, the king's corpse
was laid in a grave on a pallet. Spears
were placed on both sides, and a roof
was constructed using wooden planks and
rush matting. The remaining space within
the grave was often filled with members
of the king's court that had all been
throttled to death. A concubine, wine
server, cook, groom, steward, messenger,
horses, and various possessions. The
only items that weren't buried with the
dead king were his silver and bronze.
After this, the grave was covered with a
massive mound of
[Music]
sand. While Herodotus was in Cyia, the
Cyians gave him an account of how they
had defeated the Persians without waging
war against them. They were unbeatable.
They spoke of how in 513 BC, 26 years
before Herodotus' birth, Darius launched
a campaign against the Cythians. When
Darius reached the Danubi, a massive
river in southeastern Europe, he found a
bridge waiting for him. The Ionian
Greeks, allies of Persia at the time,
had built it specifically for his
campaign. When Darius and his Persian
army cross into what is now Romania, he
ordered for the bridge to be destroyed.
But one of the Ionian Greeks in his army
was bold enough to suggest he shouldn't
in case they had to retreat. Thankfully,
Darius agreed and ordered the Ionian
Greeks to wait by the bridge for 60
days. Before launching his attack on the
Cythians, Darius sent an envoy to the
Cythians demanding their surrender. They
declined his demand. Instead, they
united their tribes and formed three
armies. However, instead of confronting
the Persians in battle, the Cythians
engaged in a half-hearted guerilla
warfare, evaded the Persian army, and
lured them deeper into Cythian
territory. Every time the Persians came
close, the Cythians would switch routes
and take them on another wild goose
chase to nowhere. Over time, it became
clear that the Cythians had no intention
of fighting the Persians. And it was
frustrating for Darius because there
were no buildings within the Cythian
territory to destroy. no cities to sack
and no spoils to forage as supplies for
his troops. They were running out of
resources. When they reached the Orus,
modern-day Vulgar River, Darius set up
camp and sent a strongly worded message
to Idanththersis, king of the
Cythians. What is this extraordinary
behavior? Why do you keep on running
away when you could do something
different? For instance, if you think
you have the ability to resist my power,
then stop this aimless wandering. Stay
in one place and fight. But if you
recognize that you are weaker than me,
you can still stop running. Come and
discuss terms with me instead,
acknowledging me as your master with
gifts of earth and water. By earth and
water, Darius meant that they should
surrender. But Idanus responded that he
had no plans to surrender and he was
also not interested in fighting either.
And the reason was because he had no
buildings, no cities, and no farmlands
to lose. The only scenario where the
Cyians would engage the Persians was if
they found the graves of their ancestors
and desecrated it. Where the graves
were, no Persian could say for certain.
Eventually, Darius came to accept the
fact that the Cytheians weren't going to
fight. And they actually planned to wait
till the Persians had run out of
supplies so that they could win the
battle easily. So, Darius gave up on the
war and began to make his way back to
the bridge through Cythian territory.
Meanwhile, the 60 days were up and the
Cythians had actually gone ahead of the
Persians to speak to the Greeks at the
bridge. They tried to convince the
Greeks to destroy the bridge and free
themselves from Persian rule. The Greeks
deliberated what to do between
themselves and eventually agreed to
follow the advice of His of Mitus who
was against destroying the bridge.
Instead, they pretended to destroy parts
of the bridge that the Cyians could see
while encouraging them to return to
finish off the Persians. The Cythians
believed them and left. Fortunately for
Darius and his men, the Cythians didn't
find them before they reached the
bridge. The Ionian Greeks were there to
help Darius and the army cross the
Danubi to safety. But the Cythians never
forgot the Greeks trickery, and they
never forgave them. They even had an
insult for them. The Greeks make the
worst and most cowardly free people in
the world. But if they were to think of
them as slaves, no master could hope to
find more loyal and submissive
[Music]
captives. Before the king of kings tried
and failed to conquer Cyia, his conquest
haded brought parts of Libya under his
control. Herododus traveled to and saw
these parts in 440 BC. He would have
been 44 years old at the time. He wrote
of the first Libyan groups to emerge
from Egypt. They were called the
Ottomocache and they followed Egyptian
customs but wore Libyan attire. During
their marriage ceremonies, their young
women would parade themselves before
their king and the one the king liked
the most slept with him that night.
Their territory spanned from Egypt to a
bay named Pinus. But if you continued
westward, you'd find another Libyan
tribe, the Maches, who lived around Lake
Tritinus. And next to the Maches were
the Ai. They also lived around Lake
Tritonist like the Mockles, but the
river Triton divided the two tribes.
While the Mockleys grew their hair long
at the back, the AI did the same, but at
the front. The AI celebrated a festival
to the glory of Athena once a year where
the unmarried young female tribe members
would divide into two groups and fight
one another with sticks and stones. This
is how they fulfilled their ancestral
duties to their native goddesses, the
one the Greeks called Athena. They
believed the women who died of their
wounds after the fight were not true
virgins. However, before they let them
fight, the prettiest of the young women
would be dressed in a Corinthian helmet
and Greek armor, mounted on a chariot,
and paraded around the lake Tritoness.
The Aussie led a very promiscuous
lifestyle. Rather than forming couples
or getting married, they had sex freely
with whoever they wanted within the
tribe. If a female tribe member got
pregnant and gave birth to a child, all
the male tribe members would gather on
the baby's third month. And the man that
the child resembled the most was
considered the father. West of the
Trident River and next to the AI was a
Libyan tribe called the Maxis who
cultivated the land and owned houses.
They shaved their hair off the left side
of their heads but would let it grow
long on the right side. They also
smeared ochre on their bodies. Their
land teamed with exotic wildlife.
According to what the Libyans told
Herododus, there were enormous snakes,
lions, elephants, bears, asps, donkeys
with horns, do-headed creatures,
headless creatures with eyes in their
chests, wild men, and wild women.
Now, the successful conquest of Libya
would not have been possible if the
Persians didn't have a man named
Meabasis. Meabasis was King Darius's
most respected general during the
Persian king's fruitless Cyian campaign.
It was Meabasis who led his vast army.
After their retreat, after they crossed
the bridge at Danubi with the help of
Estayius of Myitus and his Ionian Greek
comrades, Darius decided to return to
Sardis, capital of Lydia. But before he
returned, he left Meabasis a mandate.
The general should stay back in Europe
as commander-in-chief of an army of
80,000 men. The mission was simple.
Subjugate the Greek cities in Helenspot.
In the months that followed, this is
exactly what the general did. First,
Meabasis conquered the brave Partheians.
Then, he marched through Thrace,
bringing every settlement and tribe
living there under the Persian king's
rule. When Darius got to Sardis, he
summoned Histias of Myitus and rewarded
him for his role in keeping the bridge
up at Danube. In the years after,
Histias would become one of his most
trusted
adviserss. After the victory over the
Perthians, Meabasis dispatched a
delegation of seven prominent Persians
to Macedonia. Their mission was to
demand earth and water for King Darius.
They wanted Macedonia to surrender. When
they arrived at Macedonia, the king
Aintis granted them what they wanted and
afterwards hosted a banquet for them.
When the Persians were wellfed and
drunk, they scolded the Macedonian king
for not offering them concubines and
wives in accordance with Persian
customs. Now, this was against
Macedonian customs. Women weren't
allowed to sit with men at the dinner
tables. However, Amnantis agreed because
he'd already offered earth and water to
Darius. Women were provided for the
drunk Persians, and they immediately
began touching the women
inappropriately. King Amentis was
maddened, but refused to intervene.
However, his son Alexander had other
plans. He urged his father to go to bed
and offered to attend to the Persians
himself. Amintis could sense Alexander
had an ulterior motive. So he warned him
against causing any trouble that would
bring the wrath of Darius on Macedon.
But Alexander ignored his father's
advice and suggested letting the women
bathe before offering them as gifts to
the Persians. When they agreed,
Alexander switched the women with
beardless Macedonian men disguised in
women's clothing and armed with daggers.
This time, when the Persians attempted
to touch them, the disguised Macedonians
stabbed them to death. To avoid Darius's
rage, Alexander got rid of their bodies
and kept their death a
secret. Meanwhile, Meabases had grown
suspicious of Estas. Darius was too fond
of the Greek. The Persian king had given
the Thracian land of Myserinus to him as
a gift. And now Histius had begun
fortifying it. When Meabasis found out,
he was furious. He protested Adarius,
warning him about the potential threat
Histas posed. "My lord," he said, "What
have you done? You've allowed a Greek,
and a cunning and clever Greek at that,
to found a settlement in Thrace, where
there is a limitless supply of timber
for ship building, where there are
plenty of spars for ores. I think you
should put an end to Histius's
enterprise now if you want to avoid
being embroiled in a war in your own
territory. Darius saw a reason in
Meabas's suspicions. And even though he
trusted Histius deeply, he summoned the
Greek tyrant to his court, ordering him
to stay. Histas wasn't pleased with this
arrangement, but he had no choice.
[Music]
Meanwhile, Hisas's home, Myitus, was
ruled by his son-in-law, Aristo, in his
absence. Now, Aristocoras was a little
ambitious. His ambition found
opportunity when he was approached by
some Naxians who were trying to reclaim
their island, Knos. Knos was one of many
islands on the South Igian that weren't
under Persian rule. Aristocigor saw an
opportunity for conquest. So he
approached Darius's halfb brotherther
Artrenis who was the head of their
district. Artrenis spoke to Darius and
Darius sent him the military resources
he needed. But the conquest turned out
to be a failure. After 3 months of
fighting, Aristo accepted defeat. Aristo
was scared his failure would enraged
Darius. He was scared the Persian king
would punish him for wasting the
military resources he had sent for his
little conquest. So, Aristo decided to
protect himself by launching an Ionian
revolt against the Persian king. Or did
he? Herododus claimed to know another
version of the origins of the Ionian
revolt. In this account, Histias, who
had grown impatient with his new life in
the king's court and long to return home
to rule his land, decided to send a
trusted slave to Ionia with the word
revolt tattooed on his scalp. When
Aristoas received the slave, he decided
to act on the instructions of his
father-in-law. Darius was enraged, but
he didn't suspect Histias was behind the
revolt. So when Histias came to the king
of kings, offering to return to Myus to
squash the revolt, Darius obliged. And
so Histias made his way to his comrades.
Meanwhile, Aristo began searching for
allies that would help in his revolt
against Darius and his Persian forces.
He needed help from the strongest Greek
state. He needed
Sparta. When the Ionians revolted
against Persia, Clemenes was king of
Sparta. But Clemenes should never have
been king. The only reason he even
existed was because his father, the
Spartan king Anaxendritis, was forced to
take a second wife when his first wife
couldn't bear him a child. Unfortunately
for Reax and Dritis, after he took that
second wife and after she had conceived
Cleo Manis, his first wife got pregnant
also and gave birth to a son, Dorius.
After Dorius, his first wife got
pregnant again with Leonitis and
immediately after that, Cleamro. four
sons in total from his first wife, a
woman everyone had thought was barren.
Now Dorius was the opposite of Cleomanis
in character, intelligence, and
strength. But none of that mattered
because by law, he was the second son.
So when their father and Axendrus died,
the throne went to Cleo Menise, the
firstborn son. Dorius refused this
decision and refused to be ruled by Cleo
Manis. So he took some Spartans on an
expedition to Libya where he planned to
find land and start his own colony of
Spartans. On the way, Dorius got into a
war that he had no business fighting.
Unfortunately, he died on the
battlefield and Clemens continued his
reign as king of Sparta. So when
Aristoas arrived in Sparta, he begged
Cleomanis to liberate his people, the
Ionians, from slavery. He described the
Persians as wealthy people who had lots
of gold, silver, bronze, clothes,
animals, and slaves. He also tried to
convince Cleomanis that conquering
Persia would bring more riches than his
local disputes. Clemenis listened and
asked for two days to think before his
decision. 2 days later, Clemens asked
Aristoas how far the Ionian coast was
from his palace. When Aristocoras
mentioned a 3-month journey, Cleomanis
immediately ordered him to leave. The
war was not worth the distance. Aristo
was thrown out of Sparta. So, he turned
to Athens. At the time, Athens was the
second strongest Greek state, second
only to Sparta. Aristo repeated the same
things he had told the Spartan king to
the Athenian assembly. But this time, he
was more desperate. He made so many
promises that he eventually won the
Athenians over and they voted to send a
fleet of 20 ships to help the Ionians in
their revolt against the Persian
army. As the Ionian revolt grew, so did
her allies. Smyrna, Ephesus, and
Byzantium all joined in attacking
Persian garrisons in the region. In 498
B.CE, De a combined force of Ionian
cities descended upon Sardis, capital of
Lydia. It had been a stronghold of
Persia ever since Cyrus deposed Cus. The
Persian forces in the city fought hard
against the Ionian rebels, but had to
retreat to the city's central citadel,
where Artrenises and his Persian forces
succeeded in holding off the Greek
attackers. Eventually, Aristo and his
Ionians realized they couldn't capture
the city. So, they chose to burn the
city to the ground. And this was it.
This was what pushed Darius to the edge,
enraged him and made him vow to crush
Athens for aiding the revolt. This was
what triggered Greco Persian wars. The
battle of Marathon, the battle of Plia
and Solomus. This was the beginning of
the war that Herododus was born into. A
war that would turn the tides against
the Persians in favor of the Greeks.
[Music]
The Persian counterattack was swift,
precise, utterly ruthless. Durius
crushed and subdued all the Ionian
cities that had participated in the
revolt. Aristo fled. Histus would be
killed and his head sent to the Persian
king, who still refused to believe his
beloved Greek had anything to do with
the revolt. Molitus was captured and the
Ionian revolt came to an end. But Darius
wasn't done. He wanted to punish Athens.
So he sent his son-in-law Mardonius on a
campaign to subdue the city. However,
Mardonius faced a stunning failure as
300 ships from his fleet got destroyed
in a storm off the coast of Mount Aos.
This failure delayed the Persian
invasion of Athens and it was a blessing
for them because the Athenians quickly
took steps to defend themselves.
Meanwhile, Persia began preparations for
another invasion. Luckily for the
Athenians, they had Miltiades. Miltiades
was an Athenian general who had lived in
Persia and was versed in Persian
military tactics. He advised the
Athenians to confront the Persians at
Marathon because the terrain at Marathon
was relatively flat. This would allow
the Athenians to use their disciplined
hoplight infantry effectively. The gods
were on the side of the Athenians in
this war. They had the approval of the
Oracle of Deli. They had Thesius, hero
of Athens, on their side. The morale of
the Athenians was at its peak. So with
Miltiades leading from the army, the
Athenians deployed approximately 10,000
hoplight soldiers to Marathon. When the
Persian fleet landed at Marathon, the
Athenians launched a surprise attack.
Despite being outnumbered, the battle
was fierce and the Greeks successfully
withstood the Persian archers and
charged at the enemy, breaking their
lines. When the dust settled, 6,400
Persians had fallen. And on the Athenian
flank, only 192 men were
[Music]
killed. Ships, horses, supplies,
transport vessels. Darius's rage knew no
bounds as he fumed at the defeat he
suffered at Marathon and prepared for
yet another attempt on Athens. The three
years that followed the battle of
Marathon saw the entire continent of
Asia in turmoil as they raced to meet
the heavy demands that Darius imposed on
them. The king of kings wanted revenge,
but the situation was about to get more
complex because in the fourth year of
his preparation, Egypt also revolted
against the Persian Empire. Earth and
water was not enough. Now, Darius wanted
blood and fire. But before he could get
his revenge, in the middle of his
preparations and a few months after the
Egyptian revolt, Darius the Great died.
His son Xerxes, son of Atasa, daughter
of Cyrus the Great, took the throne of
his
father. Xerxes couldn't find a reason to
continue his father's vendetta against
the Greeks. Make no mistake, he squashed
the Egyptian revolt, reducing them to a
worse state of slavery than what they
had experienced under Darius. But with
the Greeks, he was hesitant. He was
aware of the difficulties his father had
faced, and the defeat at the Battle of
Marathon was still fresh on everybody's
mind. But Mardonius, his cousin and most
trusted adviser, wanted the war. He
tried and eventually succeeded in
convincing Xerxes to continue Darius's
war on the Greeks. Meanwhile, the Greeks
formed a coalition of citystates.
Everyone from the Spartans to the
Athenians to the Thieans and Thespians.
It was a united Greek front. They
decided to stop the Persians from
entering Greece by defending the pass of
Thermopoly. It was a narrow coastal
passage between the mountains and the
sea. By forcing the Persians to wage war
with them at this narrow pass, their
vast army meant nothing. King Leonitis
of Sparta was chosen to lead the Greek
forces. 7,000 Greek hoplights and 300
Spartans under Leonitis defended that
pass. Before the war began, Xerxes
recognized how small the Greeks were and
sent emissaries to Leonitis, giving them
one last chance to surrender. More
specifically, he asked them to surrender
their weapons. But King Leonitis replied
to the Persian king, "Come and take
them." The battle of Thermopoly lasted
for 3 days. And for those three days,
the Greeks held back the Persian advance
with Leonitis and his 300 Spartans at
the forefront of the offensive
[Music]
defense. Aaltes was a local sheep herder
who lived around Thermopoly and during
the historical battle. He was Greek.
Unfortunately, he was also a
self-serving coward. The pass of
Thermopoly was not the only way into
Greece. There was a secret mountain path
that led behind Greek lines, but Aaltes
revealed it to the Persians. He guided
them through the path, hoping his act of
betrayal would make Xerxes look kindly
on him and reward him. Attelies got his
reward, not from Exerxes, but from his
fellow Greeks whom he
betrayed. Much later, they hunted him
down and killed him for his treachery.
Using the mountain path, the Persians
now surrounded the Greeks and the
Spartans, flipping the odds of the
battle in their favor. When Leonitis saw
this, he ordered his Greek allies to
retreat. Then, King Leonitis and his 300
Spartans fought one last battle fiercely
till he and all 300 Spartans fell. The
Greeks might have lost the battle of
Thermopoly, but their fierce resistance
helped them buy valuable time to
organize and prepare for future battles.
And it also helped the morale of the
Greeks who had once again refused to
offer earth and water to the king of
kings. While the battle of Thermopoly
was lost on land, the Greek fleet waxed
with hope on the high seas. The Greek
fleet at Artemisium comprised 127
Athenian ships, 40 Corinthian ships, 20
Megarian ships, and a handful of
contributions from other city states. A
Spartan named Yuriades led the fleet as
supreme commander. Another hero on the
seas was the Athenian Theisticles who
ensured that the Greeks remained united
as tensions grew between the Athenians
and other city states. It also appeared
like the gods were on the side of the
Athenians because when the vast Persian
fleet tried to surround and destroy the
Athenian fleet, a storm raged and
destroyed them instead. 200 Persian
ships perished. However, this did not
mean the Persians could be stopped. They
still outnumbered the Greek on the sea.
The Mysticles knew that he could only
hold off the Persians for so long. He
knew that a Persian invasion was
inevitable. He knew it was only a matter
of time before the Persians raided
Athens. And if that happened, if Xerxes
gave Darius's revenge by spilling
Athenian blood, then the spirits of the
Greek would be defeated and battles
would be lost before they began. So he
made a difficult decision. The Mysticles
evacuated every living thing from
Athens. He emptied out the city and
moved the citizens to the island of
Solomus far away from the conflict. The
Athenians would fight without fear when
their families were safe. 5 months after
the battle of Thermopoly, the Greeks
found themselves once again in the heat
of another
battle. The odds were against them. The
Persian fleet had such a numerical
advantage over the Greeks, the war
looked over before it even began. But
feminist myistically set a strategy to
level the playing field. Like always, he
had to play to Greek advantage. And to
do that, he planned to use the narrow
waters of Solomus Straits to diminish
the numerical strength of the Persian
Navy. The Persian ships were large and
difficult to maneuver. The Greek ships,
on the other hand, were the opposite,
much smaller, much more nimble. They
were called tri in battle. Feisticles
and the Greek fleet feigned a retreat
and lured the Persian ships into the
narrow straits in the strait. And as
predicted, the Persian ships were
trapped and disorganized. They couldn't
use their numerical superiority to their
advantage. So the Greeks exploited this
chaos and cut through them like a hot
dagger through cheese. The result was a
devastating defeat for the Persian Navy.
The Greek could see their victory
peaking above the horizon, but the war
was still far from
over. After the defeat at Solomus,
Xerxes returned to Persia and left
Mardonius in command of the remaining
forces in Greece. General Mardonius
moved south to occupy Athens. Thanks to
The Mysticles foresight, the city had
already been deserted and the Athenian
population had taken refuge on the
nearby island of Solomus. But the Greek
were not naive. They knew as long as the
Persians continued to stay on their
continent, they remained a serious
threat to Greek freedom, the war wasn't
over. So they formed new and stronger
alliances between citystates. Sparta
took the lead of this alliance, and
Posanius, a Spartan general, was
appointed as the overall commander of
the Greek forces. Winter was
approaching. On the Persian front,
General Mardonius knew that a winter
campaign against the Greek forces on
their land would be disastrous. So he
left Athens, moved to Thieves, and tried
to entice the Greek citystates into
breaking their alliance. At this time,
the Thieans had already abandoned the
Greek cause and sided with the Persians.
Why? To spite the Athenians. They hated
them that much. However, they would pay
dearly for it much later. In the
meantime, the Allied Greek army rejected
Mardonius's offer and chose to march
towards Plia while their fleet sailed to
Mic to confront the Persians. One war,
two battlefronts, on land and on sea.
The objective incredibly simple. Expel
the Persian forces from all of
Greece. At Platia, the Greeks employed a
defensive strategy. They used its high
ground for their hoplight failinks
formation. Then they built stake walls
around their camp. Meanwhile, Mardonius
had journeyed to PIA with his army,
ready for what was about to become a
decisive battle. Mardonius began the
attack with his archers and cavalry,
trying to undermine their mobility while
breaking through their defensive lines.
But the Greeks tightly packed formation
of soldiers with overlapping shields and
protruding spears ensured that the
Persian arrows were useless and their
cavalry ineffective. At first, it seemed
like the battle would go on forever.
Then the tables turned on the Persian
army. A Spartan named Aimnistice
murdered Mardonius in the heat of
battle. The effect of their general's
death was immediate and destabilizing.
The Persian forces were demoralized and
the Greeks exploited their confusion for
a brutal counterattack. As the Persians
retreated, the Greeks pursued them
relentlessly, killing as many as they
could. On the fields of Pia, the Greeks
had won the battle. Meanwhile, at sea,
Posanius and his Greek fleet waged a
bitter war against the Persians. At
first, the Persian resistance was
effective. But when an Athenian fleet
led by Leo Tyades arrived to join the
battle, the Greeks turned the tides
against the Persians. The Persian ships
that weren't destroyed completely fled
in retreat back to Sardis and Lydia. The
Persian naval power was so severely
diminished that it spelt the end of the
Persian threat on mainland Greece and
beginning of an independence that the
Greeks had fought with their soul, their
spirit, blood, and sweat. The year was
479 BC and the historian Herodotus was
just 5 years old at the time. He would
have heard the impossible tales of glory
and he would have wondered how and why.
While he didn't write about it in his
histories, Xerxes is believed to have
met a violent end at the hands of
assassins in 465 BC when Herodotus was
19. And as Herodotus grew older,
traveled around the world, and recorded
the stories, he would have his own
moment against
[Music]
tyranny. The year was 454
B.CE. Heroditus was either at the end or
the latter end of his travels. The
stories, the people, the cultures, and
the geography of the diverse people he
had traveled allowed for a detailed map
to be constructed. Herodotus would have
been 30 years at this time, somewhere in
the midst of his many travels. At the
time, Ligdamus was the terrible tyrant
of Hocarnasses, the same tyrant that had
killed Herodus's uncle, squashing an
uprising that saw Herododus and his
family exiled from their home. In 454
B.CE, there was another uprising. This
time, Herodotus joined the rebellion,
bringing a permanent end to Ligdamus'
tyranny. Around 450 B.CE. And at the age
of 34, Herodotus joined a group
establishing a colony at Thuri, a Greek
city in southern Italy. He spent his
later years in Thuri working on his
histories. Historians believe he also
spent some time in Athens. If you
existed during his time, you would have
heard it from the mouth of the man
himself as you stood in the midst of a
Greek crowd in awe. It's also possible
that if you lived in Olympia during the
time Heroditus visited, you could have
rubbed shoulders with the father of a
young boy named Thusidities. Historians
say that as Herodotus recited his work,
Thusidities burst into tears and
Herodotus told the boy's father quite
prophetically, "Your son's soul yearns
for knowledge." Thusidities would grow
up to become one of the most important
historians of antiquity whose rigorous
and systematic approach was heavily
inspired by the methodology and style of
Heroditus. After Thusidities, thousands
of historians have followed in his
footsteps, looking up to Herododus as
the first true
historian. Sometime between 425 and 413
B.CE, CE Herododus died, leaving behind
a legacy that has endured beyond two
millennia to this very moment.